THE CONTENTS OF THE INSCRIPTION ON THE ROSETTA STONE. 

The inscription on the Rosetta Stone is a copy of the Decree passed by 
the General Council of Egyptian priests assembled at Memphis to celebrate 
the first commemoration of the coronation of Ptolemy V, Epiphanes, king of 
all Egypt. The young king had been crowned in the eighth year of his reign, 
therefore the first commemoration took place in the ninth year, in the spring 
of the year B.C. 196. The original form of the Decree is given by the Demotic 
section, and the Hieroglyphic and Greek versions were made from it. 

The inscription is dated on the fourth day of the Greek month Xandikos 
(April), corresponding to the eighteenth day of the Egyptian month Meshir, or 
Mekhir, of the ninth year of the reign of Ptolemy V, Epiphanes, the year in 
which Aetus, the son of Aetus, was chief priest and Pyrrha, the daughter of 
Philinus, and Areia, the daughter of Diogenes, and Irene, the daughter of Ptolemy, 
were chief priestesses. The opening lines are filled with a list of the titles 
of Ptolemy V, and a series of epithets which proclaim the king's piety towards 
the gods, and his love for the Egyptians and his country. In the second section 
of the inscription the priests enumerate the benefits which he had conferred 
upon Egypt, and which may be thus summarized : 

1. Gifts of money and corn to the temples. 

2. Gifts of endowments to temples. 

3. Remission of one half of taxes due to the Government. 

4. Abolition of one half of the taxes. 

5. Forgiveness of debts owed by the people to the Government. 

6. Release of the prisoners who had been languishing in gaol for 

years. 

7. Abolition of the press-gang for sailors. 

8. Reduction of fees payable by candidates for the priesthood. 

9. Reduction of the dues payable by the temples to the Government. 

10. Restoration of the services in the temples. 

11. Forgiveness of rebels, who were permitted to return to Egypt 

and live there. 

12. Despatch of troops by sea and land against the enemies of Egypt. 

13. The siege and conquest of the town of Shekan (Lycopolis). 

14. Forgiveness of the debts owed by the priests to him. 



8 

15. Reduction of the tax on byssus. 

16. Reduction of the tax on corn lands. 

17. Restoration of the temples of the Apis and Mnevis Bulls, and 

of the other sacred animals. 

18. Rebuilding of ruined shrines and sacred buildings, and providing 

them with endowments. 

As a mark of the gratitude of the priesthood to the king for all these 
gracious acts of Ptolemy V, it was decided by the General Council of the priests 
of Egypt to " increase the ceremonial observances of honour which are paid to 
Ptolemy, the ever-living, in the temples." With this object in view it was 
decided : 

1. To make statues of Ptolemy in his character of "Saviour of 

Egypt," and to set up one in every temple of Egypt for the 
priests and people to worship. 

2. To make figures of Ptolemy [in gold], and to place them in gold 

shrines, which are to be set side by side with the shrines 
of the gods, and carried about in procession with them. 

3. To distinguish the shrine of Ptolemy by means of ten double- 

crowns of gold which are to be placed upon it. 

4. To make the anniversaries of the birthday and coronation days 

of Ptolemy, viz., the XVIIth and the XXXth days of the month 
Mesore, festival days for ever. 

5. To make the first five days of the month of Thoth days of festival 

for ever ; offerings shall be made in the temples, and all the 
people shall wear garlands. 

6. To add a new title to the titles of the priests, viz., " Priests 

of the beneficent god Ptolemy Epiphanes, who appeareth on 
earth," which is to be cut upon the ring of every priest of 
Ptolemy, and inserted in every priestly document. 

7. That the soldiers may borrow the shrines with figures of Ptolemy 

inside them from the temples, and may take them to their 
quarters, and carry them about in procession. 

8. That copies of this Decree shall be cut upon slabs of basalt in the 

"writing of the speech of the god," i.e. hieroglyphs, and in the 
writing of the books, i.e. demotic, and in the writing of the 
Ueienin, i.e. Greek. " And a basalt slab on which a copy of 
this Decree is cut shall be set up in the temples of the first, 
second and third orders, side by side with the statue of Ptolemy, 
the ever-living god . ' ' 



E. A. WALLIS BUDGE. 



Department of Egyptian and Assyrian Antiquities, 

July 12th, 1913. 

